Add an aggregator for IPv4 and IPv6 subnets (#82410)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/aggregations/bucket/ipprefix-aggregation.asciidoc

[[search-aggregations-bucket-ipprefix-aggregation]]
=== IP prefix aggregation
++++
<titleabbrev>IP prefix</titleabbrev>

> ++++

Reviewer: Just adding some whitespace for readability.
```suggestion
++++

```

> IP addresses can be aggregated according to their network or sub-network. IP addresses consists of two groups of bits: the most significant bits which represent the network prefix, and the least significant bits which represent the host.

Reviewer: I think the first sentence should have a stronger description of the aggregation. Something like:

`A bucket aggregation that groups documents based on the network or sub-network of an IP address.`

The second sentence has a subject-verb agreement error:
```suggestion
IP addresses can be aggregated according to their network or sub-network. An IP address consists of two groups of bits: the most significant bits which represent the network prefix, and the least significant bits which represent the host.
```

Author: Yes, you are right...I thought about that. I think favouring conciseness assuming uses do know what we are talking about is important.

The network or sub-network is usually identified using a netmask, or a prefix length. The prefix length defines the number of bits representing the network prefix.

> For example consider the following index:

Reviewer: A heading here may make this more readable:
```suggestion
[[ipprefix-agg-ex]]
==== Example

For example, consider the following index:
```

[source,console]
----------------------------------------------
PUT network-traffic
{
    "mappings": {
        "properties": {
            "ipv4": { "type": "ip" },
            "ipv6": { "type": "ip" }
        }
    }
}

POST /network-traffic/_bulk?refresh
{"index":{"_id":0}}
{"ipv4":"192.168.1.10","ipv6":"2001:db8:a4f8:112a:6001:0:12:7f10"}
{"index":{"_id":1}}
{"ipv4":"192.168.1.12","ipv6":"2001:db8:a4f8:112a:6001:0:12:7f12"}
{"index":{"_id":2}}
{ "ipv4":"192.168.1.33","ipv6":"2001:db8:a4f8:112a:6001:0:12:7f33"}
{"index":{"_id":3}}
{"ipv4":"192.168.1.10","ipv6":"2001:db8:a4f8:112a:6001:0:12:7f10"}
{"index":{"_id":4}}
{"ipv4":"192.168.2.41","ipv6":"2001:db8:a4f8:112c:6001:0:12:7f41"}
{"index":{"_id":5}}
{"ipv4":"192.168.2.10","ipv6":"2001:db8:a4f8:112c:6001:0:12:7f10"}
{"index":{"_id":6}}
{"ipv4":"192.168.2.23","ipv6":"2001:db8:a4f8:112c:6001:0:12:7f23"}
{"index":{"_id":7}}
{"ipv4":"192.168.3.201","ipv6":"2001:db8:a4f8:114f:6001:0:12:7201"}
{"index":{"_id":8}}
{"ipv4":"192.168.3.107","ipv6":"2001:db8:a4f8:114f:6001:0:12:7307"}
----------------------------------------------
// TESTSETUP

> The following aggregation will aggregate documents in buckets, each identifying a different sub-network. The sub-network is calculated applying a netmask with prefix length of `24` to each IP address in the `ipv4` field:

Reviewer: Try to avoid future tense (_will_) when possible. I also split the first sentence so it's a little easier to read.
```suggestion
The following aggregation groups documents into buckets. Each bucket identifies a different sub-network. The sub-network is calculated applying a netmask with prefix length of `24` to each IP address in the `ipv4` field:
```

[source,console,id=ip-prefix-ipv4-example]
--------------------------------------------------
GET /network-traffic/_search
{
  "size": 0,
  "aggs": {
    "ipv4-subnets": {
      "ip_prefix": {
        "field": "ipv4",
        "prefix_len": 24
      }
    }
  }
}
--------------------------------------------------
// TEST

Response:

[source,console-result]
--------------------------------------------------
{
  ...

  "aggregations": {
    "ipv4-subnets": {
      "buckets": [
        {
          "key": "192.168.1.0",
          "is_ipv6": false,
          "doc_count": 4,
          "prefix_len": 24,
          "netmask": "255.255.255.0"
        },
        {
          "key": "192.168.2.0",
          "is_ipv6": false,
          "doc_count": 3,
          "prefix_len": 24,
          "netmask": "255.255.255.0"
        },
        {
           "key": "192.168.3.0",
           "is_ipv6": false,
           "doc_count": 2,
           "prefix_len": 24,
           "netmask": "255.255.255.0"
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
--------------------------------------------------
// TESTRESPONSE[s/\.\.\./"took": $body.took,"timed_out": false,"_shards": $body._shards,"hits": $body.hits,/]

> In a similar way we can aggregate IPv6 addresses, making sure we set the `is_ipv6` flag to `true` (see section below):

Reviewer: I'd remove the `see section below` text. This could easily break if we later remove or reorganize these docs.
```suggestion
To aggregate IPv6 addresses, set `is_ipv6` to `true`.
```

[source,console,id=ip-prefix-ipv6-example]
--------------------------------------------------
GET /network-traffic/_search
{
  "size": 0,
  "aggs": {
    "ipv6-subnets": {
      "ip_prefix": {
        "field": "ipv6",
        "prefix_len": 64,
        "is_ipv6": true
      }
    }
  }
}
--------------------------------------------------
// TEST

Response:

[source,console-result]
--------------------------------------------------
{
  ...

  "aggregations": {
    "ipv6-subnets": {
      "buckets": [
        {
          "key": "2001:db8:a4f8:112a::",
          "is_ipv6": true,
          "doc_count": 4,
          "prefix_len": 64
        },
        {
          "key": "2001:db8:a4f8:112c::",
          "is_ipv6": true,
          "doc_count": 3,
          "prefix_len": 64
        },
        {
          "key": "2001:db8:a4f8:114f::",
          "is_ipv6": true,
          "doc_count": 2,
          "prefix_len": 64
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
--------------------------------------------------
// TESTRESPONSE[s/\.\.\./"took": $body.took,"timed_out": false,"_shards": $body._shards,"hits": $body.hits,/]

> NOTE: the `netmask` field is not returned in the response when flag `is_ipv6` is set to `true`.

Reviewer: I don't know if we need this in a separate note. I'd consider moving it above the response.

> 

Reviewer: These examples are great. However, I think we should also define the input parameters and response properties in a list. For example, we don't state whether `field` needs to be an `ip` field or not.

You can use the adjacency matrix docs for an example:

https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/master/search-aggregations-bucket-adjacency-matrix-aggregation.html#adjacency-matrix-agg-params

> ==== Keyed Response

Reviewer: If possible, try to set explicit anchor IDs for each heading. Otherwise, our docs build will auto-generate it, which can break the anchors and create namespacing issues.
```suggestion
[[ipprefix-agg-keyed-response]]
==== Keyed Response
```

> Setting the `keyed` flag to `true` will associate a unique IP address key with each bucket and return sub-networks as a hash rather than an array:

Reviewer: Some minor grammar fixes:
```suggestion
Set the `keyed` flag of `true` to associate an unique IP address key with each bucket and return sub-networks as a hash rather than an array:
```

Example:

[source,console,id=ip-prefix-keyed-example]
--------------------------------------------------
GET /network-traffic/_search
{
  "size": 0,
  "aggs": {
    "ipv4-subnets": {
      "ip_prefix": {
        "field": "ipv4",
        "prefix_len": 24,
        "keyed": true
      }
    }
  }
}
--------------------------------------------------
// TEST

Response:

[source,console-result]
--------------------------------------------------
{
  ...

  "aggregations": {
    "ipv4-subnets": {
      "buckets": {
        "192.168.1.0": {
          "is_ipv6": false,
          "doc_count": 4,
          "prefix_len": 24,
          "netmask": "255.255.255.0"
        },
        "192.168.2.0": {
          "is_ipv6": false,
          "doc_count": 3,
          "prefix_len": 24,
          "netmask": "255.255.255.0"
        },
        "192.168.3.0": {
          "is_ipv6": false,
          "doc_count": 2,
          "prefix_len": 24,
          "netmask": "255.255.255.0"
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
--------------------------------------------------
// TESTRESPONSE[s/\.\.\./"took": $body.took,"timed_out": false,"_shards": $body._shards,"hits": $body.hits,/]

> ==== Appending the prefix length to the IP address key
> 
> Setting the `append_prefix_len` flag to `true` will return IP address keys catenated with the prefix length of the sub-network:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[[ipprefix-agg-append-prefix-length]]
==== Append the prefix length to the IP address key

Set the `append_prefix_len` flag to `true` to catenate IP address keys with the prefix length of the sub-network:
```

--------------------------------------------------
GET /network-traffic/_search
{
  "size": 0,
  "aggs": {
    "ipv4-subnets": {
      "ip_prefix": {
        "field": "ipv4",
        "prefix_len": 24,
        "append_prefix_len": true
      }
    }
  }
}
--------------------------------------------------
// TEST

Response:

[source,console-result]
--------------------------------------------------
{
  ...

  "aggregations": {
    "ipv4-subnets": {
      "buckets": [
        {
          "key": "192.168.1.0/24",
          "is_ipv6": false,
          "doc_count": 4,
          "prefix_len": 24,
          "netmask": "255.255.255.0"
        },
        {
          "key": "192.168.2.0/24",
          "is_ipv6": false,
          "doc_count": 3,
          "prefix_len": 24,
          "netmask": "255.255.255.0"
        },
        {
          "key": "192.168.3.0/24",
          "is_ipv6": false,
          "doc_count": 2,
          "prefix_len": 24,
          "netmask": "255.255.255.0"
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
--------------------------------------------------
// TESTRESPONSE[s/\.\.\./"took": $body.took,"timed_out": false,"_shards": $body._shards,"hits": $body.hits,/]

> ==== Minimum document count
> 
> It is possible to change the response in such a way that only buckets including a minimum number of documents are returned, using the `min_doc_count` parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[[ipprefix-agg-min-doc-count]]
==== Minimum document count

Use the `min_doc_count` parameter to only return buckets with a minimum number of documents.
```

[source,console,id=ip-prefix-min-doc-count-example]
--------------------------------------------------
GET /network-traffic/_search
{
  "size": 0,
  "aggs": {
    "ipv4-subnets": {
      "ip_prefix": {
        "field": "ipv4",
        "prefix_len": 24,
        "min_doc_count": 3
      }
    }
  }
}
--------------------------------------------------
// TEST

Response:

[source,console-result]
--------------------------------------------------
{
  ...

  "aggregations": {
    "ipv4-subnets": {
      "buckets": [
        {
          "key": "192.168.1.0",
          "is_ipv6": false,
          "doc_count": 4,
          "prefix_len": 24,
          "netmask": "255.255.255.0"
        },
        {
          "key": "192.168.2.0",
          "is_ipv6": false,
          "doc_count": 3,
          "prefix_len": 24,
          "netmask": "255.255.255.0"
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
--------------------------------------------------
// TESTRESPONSE[s/\.\.\./"took": $body.took,"timed_out": false,"_shards": $body._shards,"hits": $body.hits,/]

==== IPv6 vs IPv4 addresses and sub-networks

> Just specifying the `prefix_len` parameter is not enough to know if an IP prefix aggregation is done on IPv4 or IPv6 addresses. As a result, the `is_ipv6` flag is needed and defaults to `false`. Failing to set it appropriately will result in unpredictable results due to the way the netmask is applied.

Reviewer: This would be great to note in the parameter and response property definitions.

[[search-aggregations-bucket-ipprefix-aggregation]]
=== IP prefix aggregation
++++
<titleabbrev>IP prefix</titleabbrev>
++++
IP addresses can be aggregated according to their network or sub-network. IP addresses consists of two groups of bits: the most significant bits which represent the network prefix, and the least significant bits which represent the host.
The network or sub-network is usually identified using a netmask, or a prefix length. The prefix length defines the number of bits representing the network prefix.

For example consider the following index:
[source,console]
----------------------------------------------
PUT network-traffic
{
    "mappings": {
        "properties": {
            "ipv4": { "type": "ip" },
            "ipv6": { "type": "ip" }
        }
    }
}

POST /network-traffic/_bulk?refresh

> {"index":{"_id":0}}

Author: I will remove some od the documents here just to make the whole example more compact.

[[search-aggregations-bucket-ipprefix-aggregation]]
=== IP prefix aggregation
++++
<titleabbrev>IP prefix</titleabbrev>
++++

A bucket aggregation that groups documents based on the network or sub-network of an IP address. An IP address consists of two groups of bits: the most significant bits which represent the network prefix, and the least significant bits which represent the host.

[[ipprefix-agg-ex]]
==== Example

> For example consider the following index:

Reviewer: Minor grammar nit.
```suggestion
For example, consider the following index:
```

[source,console]
----------------------------------------------
PUT network-traffic
{
    "mappings": {
        "properties": {
            "ipv4": { "type": "ip" },
            "ipv6": { "type": "ip" }
        }
    }
}

POST /network-traffic/_bulk?refresh
{"index":{"_id":0}}
{"ipv4":"192.168.1.10","ipv6":"2001:db8:a4f8:112a:6001:0:12:7f10"}
{"index":{"_id":1}}
{"ipv4":"192.168.1.12","ipv6":"2001:db8:a4f8:112a:6001:0:12:7f12"}
{"index":{"_id":2}}
{ "ipv4":"192.168.1.33","ipv6":"2001:db8:a4f8:112a:6001:0:12:7f33"}
{"index":{"_id":3}}
{"ipv4":"192.168.1.10","ipv6":"2001:db8:a4f8:112a:6001:0:12:7f10"}
{"index":{"_id":4}}
{"ipv4":"192.168.2.41","ipv6":"2001:db8:a4f8:112c:6001:0:12:7f41"}
{"index":{"_id":5}}
{"ipv4":"192.168.2.10","ipv6":"2001:db8:a4f8:112c:6001:0:12:7f10"}
{"index":{"_id":6}}
{"ipv4":"192.168.2.23","ipv6":"2001:db8:a4f8:112c:6001:0:12:7f23"}
{"index":{"_id":7}}
{"ipv4":"192.168.3.201","ipv6":"2001:db8:a4f8:114f:6001:0:12:7201"}
{"index":{"_id":8}}
{"ipv4":"192.168.3.107","ipv6":"2001:db8:a4f8:114f:6001:0:12:7307"}
----------------------------------------------
// TESTSETUP

> The following aggregation groups documents into buckets. Each bucket identifies a different sub-network. The sub-network is calculated applying a netmask with prefix length of `24` to each IP address in the `ipv4` field:

Reviewer: Minor grammar nit.
```suggestion
The following aggregation groups documents into buckets. Each bucket identifies a different sub-network. The sub-network is calculated by applying a netmask with prefix length of `24` to each IP address in the `ipv4` field:
```

{
  ...

  "aggregations": {
    "ipv4-subnets": {
      "buckets": [
        {
          "key": "192.168.1.0",
          "is_ipv6": false,
          "doc_count": 4,
          "prefix_len": 24,
          "netmask": "255.255.255.0"
        },
        {
          "key": "192.168.2.0",
          "is_ipv6": false,
          "doc_count": 3,
          "prefix_len": 24,
          "netmask": "255.255.255.0"
        },
        {
           "key": "192.168.3.0",
           "is_ipv6": false,
           "doc_count": 2,
           "prefix_len": 24,
           "netmask": "255.255.255.0"
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
--------------------------------------------------
// TESTRESPONSE[s/\.\.\./"took": $body.took,"timed_out": false,"_shards": $body._shards,"hits": $body.hits,/]

To aggregate IPv6 addresses, set `is_ipv6` to `true`.

[source,console,id=ip-prefix-ipv6-example]
--------------------------------------------------
GET /network-traffic/_search
{
  "size": 0,
  "aggs": {
    "ipv6-subnets": {
      "ip_prefix": {
        "field": "ipv6",
        "prefix_len": 64,
        "is_ipv6": true
      }
    }
  }
}
--------------------------------------------------
// TEST

> Response:

Reviewer: I'd move the sentence from below up to this section.
```suggestion
If `is_ipv6` is `true`, the response doesn't include a `netmask` for each bucket.
```

[source,console-result]
--------------------------------------------------
{
  ...

  "aggregations": {
    "ipv6-subnets": {
      "buckets": [
        {
          "key": "2001:db8:a4f8:112a::",
          "is_ipv6": true,
          "doc_count": 4,
          "prefix_len": 64
        },
        {
          "key": "2001:db8:a4f8:112c::",
          "is_ipv6": true,
          "doc_count": 3,
          "prefix_len": 64
        },
        {
          "key": "2001:db8:a4f8:114f::",
          "is_ipv6": true,
          "doc_count": 2,
          "prefix_len": 64
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
--------------------------------------------------
// TESTRESPONSE[s/\.\.\./"took": $body.took,"timed_out": false,"_shards": $body._shards,"hits": $body.hits,/]

> The `netmask` field is not returned in the response when flag `is_ipv6` is set to `true`.

Reviewer: I'd relocate this above.
```suggestion
```

[[ipprefix-agg-keyed-response]]
==== Keyed Response

> Set the `keyed` flag of `true` to associate an unique IP address key with each bucket and return sub-networks as a hash rather than an array:
> 
> Example:

Reviewer: This fixes the duplicate colons.
```suggestion
Set the `keyed` flag of `true` to associate an unique IP address key with each bucket and return sub-networks as a hash rather than an array.
```

--------------------------------------------------
GET /network-traffic/_search
{
  "size": 0,
  "aggs": {
    "ipv4-subnets": {
      "ip_prefix": {
        "field": "ipv4",
        "prefix_len": 24,
        "keyed": true
      }
    }
  }
}
--------------------------------------------------
// TEST

Response:

[source,console-result]
--------------------------------------------------
{
  ...

  "aggregations": {
    "ipv4-subnets": {
      "buckets": {
        "192.168.1.0": {
          "is_ipv6": false,
          "doc_count": 4,
          "prefix_len": 24,
          "netmask": "255.255.255.0"
        },
        "192.168.2.0": {
          "is_ipv6": false,
          "doc_count": 3,
          "prefix_len": 24,
          "netmask": "255.255.255.0"
        },
        "192.168.3.0": {
          "is_ipv6": false,
          "doc_count": 2,
          "prefix_len": 24,
          "netmask": "255.255.255.0"
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
--------------------------------------------------
// TESTRESPONSE[s/\.\.\./"took": $body.took,"timed_out": false,"_shards": $body._shards,"hits": $body.hits,/]

[[ipprefix-agg-append-prefix-length]]
==== Append the prefix length to the IP address key

> Set the `append_prefix_len` flag to `true` to catenate IP address keys with the prefix length of the sub-network:
> 
> Example:

Reviewer: Fixes duplicate colons.
```suggestion
Set the `append_prefix_len` flag to `true` to catenate IP address keys with the prefix length of the sub-network.
```

[source,console,id=ip-prefix-min-doc-count-example]
--------------------------------------------------
GET /network-traffic/_search
{
  "size": 0,
  "aggs": {
    "ipv4-subnets": {
      "ip_prefix": {
        "field": "ipv4",
        "prefix_len": 24,
        "min_doc_count": 3
      }
    }
  }
}
--------------------------------------------------
// TEST

Response:

[source,console-result]
--------------------------------------------------
{
  ...

  "aggregations": {
    "ipv4-subnets": {
      "buckets": [
        {
          "key": "192.168.1.0",
          "is_ipv6": false,
          "doc_count": 4,
          "prefix_len": 24,
          "netmask": "255.255.255.0"
        },
        {
          "key": "192.168.2.0",
          "is_ipv6": false,
          "doc_count": 3,
          "prefix_len": 24,
          "netmask": "255.255.255.0"
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
--------------------------------------------------
// TESTRESPONSE[s/\.\.\./"took": $body.took,"timed_out": false,"_shards": $body._shards,"hits": $body.hits,/]

[role="child_attributes"]
[[ip-prefix-agg-params]]
==== Parameters

`field`::
(Required, string)

> The document IP address field to aggregate on. The field mapping type must be `IP`.

Reviewer: We typically lowercase the literal `ip`. I'd also include an xref.
```suggestion
Document IP address field to aggregate on. The field mapping type must be <<ip,`ip`>>.
```

`prefix_len`::
(Required, integer)

> The length of the network prefix. For IPv4 addresses the accepted range is `[0, 32]`. For Ipv6 addresses the accepted range is `[0, 128]`.

Reviewer: Minor grammar nits.
```suggestion
Length of the network prefix. For IPv4 addresses, the accepted range is `[0, 32]`. For IPv6 addresses, the accepted range is `[0, 128]`.
```

`is_ipv6`::
(Optional, boolean)
Defines whether the prefix applies to IPv6 addresses. Just specifying the `prefix_len` parameter is not enough to know if an IP prefix applies to IPv4 or IPv6 addresses. Defaults to `false`.

`append_prefix_len`::
(Optional, boolean)
Defines whether the prefix length is appended to IP address keys in the response. Defaults to `false`.

`keyed`::
(Optional, boolean)
Defines whether buckets are returned as a hash rather than an array in the response. Defaults to `false`.

`min_doc_count`::
(Optional, integer)
Defines the minimum number of documents for buckets to be included in the response. Defaults to `1`.

[[ipprefix-agg-response]]
==== Response body

`key`::
(string)
The IPv6 or IPv4 subnet.

`prefix_len`::
(integer)
The length of the prefix used to aggregate the bucket.

`doc_count`::
(integer)
Number of documents matching a specific IP prefix.

`is_ipv6`::
(boolean)
Defines whether the netmask is an IPv6 netmask.

`netmask`::
(string)

> The IPv4 netmask. If `is_ipv6` is `true` in the request, this field is missing in the response.

Reviewer: Can we relocate these sections right above the `Keyed response` heading?
